Encryption in cryptography is a process by which a plain text or a piece of information is converted into cipher text or a text which can only be decoded by the receiver for whom the information was intended. AES, a symmetric key encryption method developed by Belgian cryptographers Joan Daemen and Vincent Rijmen, was presented by NIST in 2001. Rijndael secures critical data in communication networks, financial transactions, and file storage. AES supports 128-bit data blocks and 128, 192, or 256-bit keys. Substitutions, permutations, and mixing are used to secure encryption. The transmitter and receiver share a key for symmetric encryption. Alice and Bob must securely exchange a secret key before sending an AES-encrypted message. Bob can decrypt the message using the same secret key.Ron Rivest, Adi Shamir, and Leonard Adleman invented RSA in 1977. This encryption uses huge prime numbers and the difficulty of factoring large composite numbers. RSA encrypts and decrypts using public and private keys. The public key is disclosed, but the secret key is concealed. This enables keyless secure communication. Bob’s public key lets Alice send Bob an RSA-encrypted message. Bob’s private key decrypts the message. Digital signatures and key exchange use RSA. RSA is slower than AES and unsuitable for big data encryption owing to its computational complexity.Encryption in cryptography is a process by which a plain text or a piece of information is converted into cipher text or a text which can only be decoded by the receiver for whom the information was intended. AES, a symmetric key encryption method developed by Belgian cryptographers Joan Daemen and Vincent Rijmen, was presented by NIST in 2001. Rijndael secures critical data in communication networks, financial transactions, and file storage. AES supports 128-bit data blocks and 128, 192, or 256-bit keys. Substitutions, permutations, and mixing are used to secure encryption. The transmitter and receiver share a key for symmetric encryption. Alice and Bob must securely exchange a secret key before sending an AES-encrypted message. Bob can decrypt the message using the same secret key.Ron Rivest, Adi Shamir, and Leonard Adleman invented RSA in 1977. This encryption uses huge prime numbers and the difficulty of factoring large composite numbers. RSA encrypts and decrypts using public and private keys. The public key is disclosed, but the secret key is concealed. This enables keyless secure communication. Bob’s public key lets Alice send Bob an RSA-encrypted message. Bob’s private key decrypts the message. Digital signatures and key exchange use RSA. RSA is slower than AES and unsuitable for big data encryption owing to its computational complexity.